# Overveiw
Longitudinal behavioral research relies increasingly on the integration of multiple web apps. Vizier is intended to provide a "glue layer" that maintains a stateful representation of study participants, and coordinates calls to these web apps  


The motiation for factoring out particpant management is two-fold. First, it decreases implementation cost of building out participant management in each of the component web tasks. Second, it allows for the scheduling system to focuses on the conditional logic needed for transitioning participants between states in the experiment, isolating that from the sampling logic of the component instruments / web apps. 

Vizier is designed to provide a maximally general set of functions to coordinate a wide range of web apps. At its core, it provides for

- Declarative specification of studies as tree structures, where nodes are triggers and edges are particiapnt states
- Stateful participant tracking (=position in the tree structure)
- API endpoints to receive external triggers (Exernal Web App -> Vizier)
- Scheduled API calls (Vizier -> Vizier, scheduled in the future) 
- Chaining  API calls when triggers are hit (Vizier -> External Web App)
- Vizier has direct integration with an email API so that it can send off emails (equivalent to hitting an external API)  

The above functions are implemented with a very small set of endpoints (5) and shared functions in a Flask web app, plus a scheduling system. 


An the signal development case, Vizier coordinates between REDCap, Wordful, and WebCDI in a second pilot study for Wordful. These three components do consenting, smartphone-based data collection, and vocab evaluation at both ends.  
Rather than build out Wordful to interact with REDCap and WebCDI, instead Vizier has a set of general-purpose communication and participant state-tracking functions that allow it to communicate with all three of these web apps.
Each study is representated as a set of segments, each specifying one upstream segment and one or more downstream segments. Every segment has a unique name; cycles are not allowed. A study is composed of a single start segment (initialization), one or more event segments, and one or more end segments. This supports conditional and branching logic, which the Wordful scheduler does not handle. 

Each event segment conists of immediate events and followup events. Immediate events happen when a user starts that segment. Followup events only occur if a user has not completed that segment, i.e., if they complete a segment then any associated followup events are removed from the scheduler. Events, whether immediate or followup, belong to one of two types: 

- "api" is an API call that Vizier makes to another web app
- "email" is an email generated by Vizier (and delivered by a 3rd party API)

Waiting for a duration is a special case of a followup "API" event -specifically making a call to the update/ route on Vizier itself. This same kind of call can be used to timeout a segment, though one must take care that future segments do

Like Wordful, Vizier uses the APScheduler package backed by a Postgres instance to keep track of queued events. not require data from the timed-out segment.  


# Specifics of the Wordful study

The user flow in the Wordful pilot (for a parent/caregiver) is:

1. User clicks Facebook ad
2. User visits REDCap, completes consenting process
3. REDCap uses the "data entry trigger" functionality to instantiate a new record by hitting the `addUser` route on Vizier, and includes the studyId. Vizier now knows the position of the user in the (tree representation) of the study 
4. Following the directions in the study specification, Vizier sends an email to the user a user-specific WebCDI link
5. When the user completes WebCDI, WebCDI hits the `updateUser` endpoint of Vizier to regiser that the participant should transition to the next segment of the study. If the user does not do this after 2 days, Vizier sends a follow-up email; it will do the same after 4 days.
6. Following the directions in the study specification, Vizier sends off an immediate API call to Wordful, instantiating a user in Wordful, passing the study as a parameter. 
7. At the end of onboarding in Wordful, Wordful hits the `updateUser` endpoint of Vizier to register that the participant has should transition to the next segment of the study. 
6. This trggers Vizier to transition the user to the next segment; in the case of the Wordful pilot this includes scheduled self-call to the API to transition the user to the next part of the study after a defined interval (i.e. 30 days), rather than waiting for one of the external web apps to hit Vizier
7. After e.g. 30 days, Vizier self-calls updateUser and transitions them to the next state...
8. Which includes sending them an email with a link to the second CDI




# API endpoints

`/add(vizierStudyId, payload)`: instantiates a user in Vizier 

***args:****
`vizierStudyId`: name of the JSON tree specification for the study 
`payload`: a JSON with user properties. If it includes an `identifier` field, then Vizer will check if any previous users in this study have the same identifier, and return an error if so. Consent capture apps (REDCap, Qualtrics) should use this field to avoid multiply instantiating a user 

***returns:****
`{"vizierUserId": <uniqueId,int>}`

***errors:****
`studyIdNotSpecified`: Vizier must know the studyId 
`userAlreadyExists`: user with same `identifier` already exists in the study


`/updateUser(vizierUserId, vizierSegmentId, payload)`: updates the state of a user in Vizier. This includes

- evaluating whether this is a well-formed update call
- registering completion for a segmentId
- cancel outstanding events for that segmentId
- processing all immediate events for the new segment
- schduling the followup events for the next segments
- updating the state of the user to reflect their new segment 


***args:****
`vizierUserId`: userId in Vizier 
`vizierSegmentId`: name of the new segment
`payload`: a JSON with any information from the previous segment

***returns:****
`{"success": 1}`

***errors:****
`userNotExist`: user must exist
`segmentNotExist`: the study for this user must have this segment


`removeUser(vizierUserId)`: remove a user from state tracking in Vizier

***args:****
`vizierUserId`: userId in Vizier 

***returns:****
`{"success": 1}`

***errors:****
`userNotExist`: user must exist


`inviteUser(vizierStudyId, payload)`

***args:****
`vizierStudyId`: name of the JSON tree specification for the study 
`identifier`: JSON with any information needed to make the invitation

***returns:****
`{"success": 1}`

***errors:****
`studyIdNotSpecified`: Vizier must know the studyId 
`identifierNotSpecified`: Vizier must have information (e.g. email or phone number) to make an invite


/scheduledEventHandler(**) : accept a call to Vizier from the past

***args:****
`vizierUserId`: userId in Vizier 
`vizierStudyId`: name of the JSON tree specification for the study 
`vizierEventId`: name of the event

***returns:****
`{"success": 1}`

***errors:****
`urlNotDefined`: If an API call, a URL must be defined
`methodNotRecognized`: must be one of "email" or "api"



# Scheduling

If an event is in followup_events, then it needs to have a schedule field. A schedule node has a schedule string in the format <schedule_type>_<days>. "e_30" means trigger this event 30 days from now (at this time; Vizier does not track user timezone, so it cannot send messages at a specific time. This could be added easily by adding a user representation that keeps that information, but this would also require connected web apps to make requests to update the timezone of the user.

# Security

Assuming that only other web backends will call Vizier, there is no need for obfuscation in the API. 


#  Example API calls

1. On completion, WebCDI1 would hit an endpoint on Vizier, <vizierURL>/update with a JSON like:

{
    "userId": <userId>
    "segment": <hashed_segment_id>"
    "state": <state>,
    "user_vars": {
        "subject_id":<webcdi.subject_id>
    }
}

This call would:
    - update the user_vars for this user with anything in the user_vars field (see JSON above)
    - remove anything in the schedulder from the segment WebCDI1
    - update the user state, transitioning them to the final state in 'next_segment_names'
    - process any immediage_events in the next segments
    - Update the scheduler with any events from the next segments



Connected systems must have a way to confirm that Vizier state was updated. Note that this is a requirement of any robust system.


# Example Study Specification

A Vizier study specification --- a tree of segments --- for the ContinuousCDI study is shown in `example_study_specification.json`

# Desiderata 

- [x] A way to transitions states as a function of time
- [x] A way to represent user state, in a researcher-readable way: Keep track of last_completed sequence
- [x] A way to receive API calls from other web apps
- [X] A way to make API calls (scheduled, or after the reception of an API call through updateSegment)
- [x] A way to mintain state for  values for each user: Firebase
- [ ] Email follow-ups
- [ ] A way to serve dynamic webpages (landing / instruction) -- can pass and do immediate emails; skip the Javascript nonsense
